---
title: "Colebrooke Church History"

draft: false
---



Colebrooke Church History
=========================

Introduction.
=============

Just under 50 years ago in the constant pursuit of fundraising for the
upkeep of the Church, a little booklet was published priced 1/6d (71/2p)
entitled “The History of the Church and Parish of St. Andrews,
Colebrooke”. This excellent little book was researched and written by
Rev. Vyvyan Hope M.A. F.S.A. Rev. Hope who at that time had recently
retired from Radley College, was secretary of Friends of Exeter
Cathedral and Cathedral Receiver. He was an acknowledged authority on
monumental brasses, heraldry and church architecture, and was devoting
much of his time to the fabric and history of his beloved Cathedral. His
sister Miss E. Hope had lived at Waterleat, Penstone for many years, and
had served as secretary on the Parochial Church Council. Rev. Hope would
spend some of his holidays from College at Waterleat, and it was during
these vacations he became interested in the Church, and the Parish as a
whole. Some of the P.C.C. Minutes are in his handwriting. He died after
a long, fruitful “retirement” in 1976 at the age of 88.

It was with this background, that we approached (with some trepidation),
the task of, what is best described as “updating” the Rev. Hope’s
booklet. The greater part of his work will remain as before with
additions and deletions as necessary. There is also another 50 years of
Parish and Church fabric changes to describe. Although since 1993
Copplestone is no longer a part of our Parish we have decided to retain
all the references to it, and the Coplestone family, whose history is
inextricably linked with Colebrooke.

June 2002.

THE CHURCH AND PARISH OF ST. ANDREW, COLEBROOKE DEVON 
======================================================

It is nearly fifty years since the Rev. Isidore Daimpre, a former Vicar,
published “A Short Account of the Church and Parish of St. Andrew,
Colebrooke”, copies of which are now unobtainable. But a building so
full of interest as this one merits a detailed and up-to-date guide, and
it is hoped that the following pages will prove useful to parishioners
and visitors who wish to study its architecture and history. Some notes
on the parish have been added. Those who buy copies of this little book
may like to know that the whole of the proceeds will go to the Church
Funds.

October 1952.

St. Andrew’s Church Colebrooke 
===============================

THE DEDICATION 
---------------

In the past, books of reference have variously named St. Mary, St.
Thomas-a-Becket and St. Andrew as Patron Saints of the Church, but a
fifteenth-century will seem to settle the matter in favour of the
last-named, for on 8th June 1418, one Thomas Reymound left “XXs. for the
fabric fund of the Church of St. Andrew at Colebrooke”, and the Church
is known by this title nowadays.

THE HISTORY OF THE BUILDING 
----------------------------

**First Stage: Twelfth Century **

The earliest known reference to the Church occurs in a letter written to
King Henry II by Bartholomew, who was Bishop of Exeter 1162-84. In this,
the Bishop claimed the patronage of the living, though Alexander de
Colebrooke, Knight, who held the manor under the Bishop, had tried to
wrest the benefice from him and transfer it to the Hospital of St. John
of Jerusalem. The Bishop, while allowing the Prior and Brethren to
receive ten shillings a year from the Church, a payment which was
continued until the Reformation, appropriated the living to his Chapter
of Exeter. (There was no Dean until the office was created by Bishop
Briwere some fifty years later). Thus the Church became in due course a
\`peculiar’ of the Dean and Chapter, and, as such, was outside Episcopal
jurisdiction, until most peculiars were abolished in the middle of the
nineteenth century.

From traces which remain it is possible to picture what the building was
like in the time of Bishop Bartholomew. In the south wall of the nave,
on the outside, there can be seen, between the tower and the south
transept, the signs of four arches which once formed an arcade between
the nave and a south aisle. They are of primitive construction,
suggestive of early Norman work. Inside, the transitional Norman arch
near the pulpit shows that a south transept existed before the present
one.

So this early church probably followed the normal plan, being cruciform,
with a narrow nave, a short chancel, transepts, aisles and probably a
west tower.

**Second Stage: c. 1320 **

About a century later the building was in poor condition, for
Visitations of 1281 and 1301 reported it as badly roofed, with a small
mean chancel in need of repair. This state of affairs was, however, soon
remedied for a third Visitation of 1330 reported “an adequate chancel
and the whole church well roofed”. Again, enough remains to enable us to
picture the building as it then stood.

The south aisle had gone and the arcade was filled up. There was a nave,
well lit by windows in the early Decorated style, as the two west of the
porch show, an enlarged chancel with similar windows, and a south
transept rebuilt as a chantry chapel. The lower stages of the present
tower may have been built at this time. What had happened to the north
aisle and transept, if they ever existed, is a matter of conjecture.

**Third Stage: Fifteenth Century**

The third and final stage in the development of the building occurred in
the middle of the fifteenth century when the north aisle and the
Coplestone chantry were built in the Perpendicular style, with an arcade
of five arches between them and the nave and chancel. To this period
belong also the upper stages of the tower and the east window of the
chancel.

THE EXTERIOR OF THE BUILDING 
-----------------------------

Outside the church, the visitor should notice in the south wall the
arcade mentioned above, most of it to the west of the porch, but with
one arch between that and the transept.

On the south wall of the south transept, there are two small incisions
in the stone. One is the monogram jihs (for Jesus), the other a small
cross with four equal arms.

The large yew tree nearby was planted in 1795 over the grave of John
Sillifant of Combe.

On the south side of the chancel there is a priest’s door and below it a
stone, once clearly the top of a tomb, which may have come from one of
the recesses in the transept. Above the door on some of the guttering
can be seen the date 1879. This was when the Ecclesiastical
Commissioners completed an extensive restoration of the Chancel.

The dripstone of the east window of the chancel ends in two corbels with
shields. The southern one bears the present arms of the See of Exeter, a
sword surmounted by two keys in saltire. The other has two keys addorsed
in bend, between them a sword in bend sinister. These were the old arms
of the See of Exeter which began to be superseded by the present ones
soon after the middle of the fifteenth century.

North of the chancel we notice the east window of the aisle with its
beautiful tracery, which can be seen better outside than from within.
There is one very like it at Broad Clyst in exactly the same position.
Probably these are instances of a custom, not uncommon in Devon, of
continuing in the fifteenth century the use of motifs normally
associated with fourteenth-century work. Around the corner, in the North
Wall of the Church, we find a disused doorway leading to the Coplestone
Aisle. The remains of an old chimney can also be seen. This part of the
churchyard with graves dating from 1880-1920 was the last part of the
“old yard” to be used, before the site of a line of cottages destroyed
by fire in 1893, was incorporated into the western side of the
churchyard. In a lithograph of 1840 by William Spreat, a path can be
seen beside the North Wall extending the entire length of the Church.

Finally, we come to the tower, of which the lower stages may belong to
the rebuilding of the fourteenth century, for the west window, before it
was replaced late in the nineteenth century by the present one, is said
to have resembled those in the nave. The upper stages are probably late
fifteenth century, but the whole was thoroughly restored in 1674, as the
Churchwardens’ Accounts show, and this date, and the initials R.C., are
carved on the mouldings of the doorway. (The names of Richard Cheriton,
who provided ropes and cradle, and Robert Clarke, who “helped the
masons” occur in the accounts).

The first clock was installed in 1659 and over the years has undergone
much restoration. In 1953 surplus funds from the Coronation were used to
re-gild the face. Again in 1976, the face was completely restored
courtesy of Mr. Harold Pennington in memory of his parents, Mr. and Mrs.
W. Pennington of Horwell Barton. In recent years it has received a new
synthetic face. In 2001, while undergoing repairs, it was brought into
the 21st century with the fitting of an automatic winding mechanism.

The sundial, on the South Face of the Tower, by Hems of Exeter dated
1889, was the gift of Charles Turner. Charles’s father James, who died
in 1899 at the age of 88, had been a stonemason in the parish for over
60 years. His “signature” can still be seen on many of the 19th-century
headstones in the churchyard.

For some centuries, according to the Churchwardens’ Accounts, the church
was entirely roofed with oak shingles, but on 8th April 1844, it was
decided that all further repairs should be done in slate, and the roof
is now wholly of that material. It was reslated by public subscription
in 1985.

THE INTERIOR OF THE BUILDING 
-----------------------------

### The Nave 

On entering the Church by the south porch (noticing there the remains of
a holy-water stoup in the right-hand wall by the door), we see the roof
which throughout the Church, and also in the porch, is of the cradle
type, though in the chancel the plaster was replaced in 1879 by
boarding. There are many beautiful fifteenth-century bench ends, earlier
and less ornate than most of those in the county. Although they have
passed through various vicissitudes, having been incorporated into
horse-box pews for about a couple of centuries until the restoration of
1895, they are in a wonderfully good state of preservation. No traces
can be seen of the Gallery which was erected across the Western ends of
the Nave and the North Aisle in 1832. This was also removed during the
restoration of 1895. The date 1696 on the back of a pew in the nave near
the south transept marks the making of a seat for Mr. John Pidsley, of
Great Wotton, whose son was a benefactor to the parish. A tablet to
members of the family is on the wall above. Near this seat is a
\`squint’ through which the altar in the side chapel could be seen.

### The South Transept 

The south transept, or Horwell aisle as it is called from the estate
with which it now goes, was probably built by Sir Walter de Bathe, lord
of the manor, early in the fourteenth century when he founded the
chantry, of which the charter still exists.

In the east wall is a piscina with the bowl now blocked up, its height
showing that at some restoration the floor level has been raised about a
foot. There are canopied recesses under the south window, marking the
sites of two tombs, probably those of Sir Walter and his wife. The
much-defaced stone in the westernmost recess bears an inscription to
Elizabeth, wife of Thomas Poyntingdon, of Pennicot in Shobrooke, 1627,
and their infant daughter, Elizabeth. At the foot is a shield bearing:
(argent) a bend (gules) between six fleurs-de-lis (vert) (Poyntingdon),
impaling: per fess (sable and argent) three lions rampant
(counterchanged) (Yonge, of Colebrooke).

There is a squint in this chapel through which the chancel altar can be
seen. In the pillar near it were found the two grotesque heads now lying
in the transept. They were probably corbels in the Norman building. The
organ possibly of 18th-century origin now situated in the entrance has
occupied various positions in the Church, including it would appear,
centre spot in the ill-fated Gallery. The tapestry depicting “The Last
Supper” hanging on the East Wall was executed by the late Mr. Harold
Pennington of Horwell Barton, a former churchwarden. The beautiful
stained glass window in the South Wall depicting “The Resurrection”, was
a gift from Mrs. Frances Norrish of Horwell in memory of her husband
Samuel who died in 1888.

### The Chancel 

Leaving the transept, we notice on our right the modern pulpit presented
in 1903 by Mrs. Frances G. Norrish. Opposite to it, on the north side,
can be seen the mahogany one which it replaced, now used as a lectern.
For this one John Davey was paid £22. 14s. 0d. in 1805, the year in
which the screen and “partition” were removed. With them went what was
probably a fifteenth-century pulpit.

Close by, and now used by the Vicar, are the interesting seat and desk
which were once in the Coplestone Chantry. On the west or nave, side of
the seat may be seen the arms of the Coplestone family, which also occur
on the west side of the capital just above, namely: (argent) a chevron
engrailed (gules) between three leopards’ heads (azure). On the side of
the desk is the figure of a wild man holding a shield bearing: (argent)
a gorges or whirlpool (azure), the arms of the Gorges family. These arms
date the desk approximately, for Philip Coplestone, who held the
Coplestone estate from 1457-73, married Anne Bonville whose mother Leva
was daughter and heir of John Gorges, of Tamerton, Esquire.

Immediately above this desk can be seen a door-shaped opening in the
wall, which once gave access to the rood-loft. This doorway and some
marks in the roof immediately over the pulpit, showing where there was
once a window throwing light on the rood, are the only remaining signs
of the screen which formerly spanned the chancel at this spot. As is the
case in many Devon churches, there is no chancel arch.

The space above the screen must have been completely filled with a
tympanum, such as can still be seen at Molland and Parracombe in North
Devon, for on 26th August 1773, the parishioners resolved that “we do
agree to take down the Partition between the Church and Chancel and to
remove the King’s Arms to some other part of the Church”. Thirty-two
years later, on 18th August 1805, they obtained a faculty to remove the
screen, on the ground that “it much darkens the church”.

The altar rails are probably those made by George Davey in 1739, for
which he was paid £11. They were originally placed around three sides of
the altar with seats along the north and south walls (and hat\`pins’
above), and this arrangement continued almost to within living memory.
They have now been restored to the memory of David Gill Thornburgh,
Major (ret’d), 13th Frontier Force Rifles. 1911-1981 late of Waterleat.

The present altar and reredos with the representation of the Day of
Pentecost, were erected in 1896 in memory of Francis Synge Sillifant,
replacing a simple Jacobean Communion Table, now in the Coplestone
Aisle, for which one Leonard Reeve was paid the small sum of 19s. in
1640. It is said that Mrs. Sillifant, the donor of the reredos, desired
that the figures should represent her family and friends, she appears as
the Virgin Mary and her late husband as one of the Apostles, while a
friend was shown as Mary Magdalene, and the Vicar, Isidore Daimpre, and
the Rector of Kenn also appeared.

An interesting alms-dish was brought from Damascus and presented to the
Church in 1921 by Major C. H. Calmady-Hamlyn, then owner of the
Whelmstone and Paschoe estates in the parish. Such dishes are said by
experts to have been produced at Augsburg and Nuremberg in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries for use in international trade. The
inscription consists of repetitions of meaningless groups of letters
used for purely decorative purposes. This dish is no longer on display
for security reasons.

Of the monuments in the Church, the best is to be seen on the north wall
of the Chancel. It is to Elizabeth, the wife of Sir John Coryton, Bart.,
1677. She was the daughter of John Mills and Ann Yonge, and by her
marriage, the manor went to the family of Coryton, of Pentillie, in
Cornwall. The monument shows the following arms: (argent) a saltire
(sable) (Coryton); (ermine) a mill-rind pierced (sable) (Mills), and
Yonge, of Colebrooke (as in the south transept). Also on the North Wall
of the Chancel is a large 19th century memorial to the Sillifant family
of Coombe, parts of which are incorporated in a monument erected to the
memory of Caroline Sillifant, which stands in a field at Coombe, about
150 yards west of the Punchbowl recycling tip.

On the south wall are two plainer monuments dated 1666 and 1659 to
Margaret and Ann, daughters of John Burrington of West Sandford. One of
them has two crowned skulls, and each shows the arms of Burrington on a
lozenge, viz.: quarterly (sable and ermine), on a bend (argent) three
roundels (pellets). In Brissett’s contemporary Calendar of Arms in
Cornwall and Devon, the quarters and the tinctures of the bend and the
roundels are reversed. Also in the South Wall, we find a stained glass
window depicting “The Last Judgement”, in memory of John Woolcombe
Sillifant of Coombe. On the floor of the Chancel are to be found many
inscriptions, including one Mary Pidsley (late of Great Wotton), who
died in 1824 aged 65. She was probably the last person to be interred in
the Church.

### The Coplestone Aisle 

Leaving the Chancel and passing through the parclose screen on the north
side, we find ourselves in the Coplestone Chantry Chapel, or Aisle as it
is usually called. This Aisle, which was used as a Vestry for many
years, underwent a major restoration in the 1960’s. In the PCC minutes
of that time, we read that a letter was received from Mrs. Pope & her
daughters, requesting permission to “convert the present Vestry into a
Chapel” to commemorate the death of her husband, William Pope D.S.O.
Commander R.N., of Copplestone House in 1958. Part of the Faculty
obtained for this restoration states that it is proposed “to furnish the
Chapel with the original Jacobean Altar which is to be restored to tone
with the oak of the screen” & ” to introduce on the restored Altar a
cross & candlesticks with elliptical bases & at the top of the
candlesticks, cups to catch the grease from dripping candles”. The Aisle
was probably built c. 1460 by Philip Coplestone, and the Chantry was
founded by his younger brother, Walter, in memory of their father, John,
who died in 1457. According to Oliver, it was suppressed before the time
of the Reformation by Philip’s grandson, another John Coplestone, and
one William Snellyng without the King’s licence.

The chapel has a door in the north wall, and a fireplace with chimney,
the latter a somewhat unusual feature dating probably from the second
half of the sixteenth century when the chapel was used as the Coplestone
family pew. Originally, of course, there was an altar, and behind the
plaster a piscina is hidden. On the south side are signs of what has
variously been called a leper’s or a low side window. It would be rash
to dogmatize as to its purpose, but it may be said that if the present
recess, with its four-centred head, is any indication of its original
shape, then the window is probably not earlier than the Chapel, and so
was never in an outside wall. In 1815, a faculty was granted for the
transfer of the \`aisle’ from the holders of four different parts of the
original Coplestone estate, namely Coplestone Barton, Broomhill,
Furzedowns and Beers, to Mr. Calmady Pollexfen Hamlyn who owned the
Paschoe and Whelmstone estates and whose family was connected with the
Coplestones by marriage.

### The Screen 

The most striking feature of this chantry, and perhaps of the whole
church, is the very beautiful screen on its south and west sides. It is
of an unusual type and is thought to date from the early part of the
sixteenth century. The workmanship is definitely foreign and resembles
very closely the screenwork of some of the Brittany churches, such as
that at St. Fiacre-le-Faouet. Screens at Coldridge and Brushford in the
neighbourhood show a similar style, and it has been suggested that a
Breton carver may have settled in the district and made all three. In
1977, following an application to “The Council for Places of Worship
Conservation Committee”, a grant of £1000 was obtained towards the cost
of restoring the screen, the condition of which had been “causing
concern”. The work was carried out by Herbert Reed of Tiverton,
specialists in this field. At the same time, a small grant from the same
source enabled repairs to be carried out to the lid of the font.

### The North Nave Aisle

Passing westward through the screen, we see the pillars and capitals of
the arcade resembling many of those found in the south of the county
which are made of Beer stone and were probably shop-wrought. Above the
arcade are boards recording various charities, and, on the floor, an
inscription, the oldest in the church, to the John Coplestone, mentioned
above, 1457, and Catherine his wife, 1447. On one of the bench-ends in
this aisle the carving has been begun but never finished, being left
thus, it is thought, as a memorial to a carver who died before he could
complete the work.

Carved on the westernmost capital of the arcade is the head of an
animal. It would be difficult to say what it represents. It is not the
Coplestone crest, for that is a demi-leopard and not just a head.

### The Font 

Nearby, in the nave, is the fifteenth-century font with the staple and
hinge fastening of an early lid still to be seen. The notable cover,
surmounted by a winged angel in amice and girdled alb, is thought to be
Jacobean. On one side amongst various gouge marks, can be discerned the
date 1832, the year the Gallery was erected. The font then occupied a
position near the North Aisle. It reverted to its present position in
1895.

### The Bells

In 1553 the Church Goods Commissioners reported “iiij belles in the
towre their” but another was soon added, for the oldest bell, the
present fourth, bears the inscription: Thomas Pennington new cast us
five the XX day of July 1627. When the peal was increased to five bells,
the four original bells were transported to Pennington’s Bell Foundry in
Paul Street Exeter for recasting. The sum of £1-15-4 was paid for
“carriage of bells to Exer and backe againe”. The earlier inscriptions
on these bells have in some cases been recorded. The peal was increased
to six in 1887, when Mr. A. O. Sillifant, of Combe, added a new treble.
On this occasion, the work, which also involved recasting the tenor
bell, was carried out by Warner of Cripplegate, the firm who had cast
Big Ben earlier in the century. The last major work on the bells was
done in 1934. A plaque in the Tower states “The six bells were rehung
with ball bearings and the second and fifth bells recast in 1934 by
Mears & Stainbank”.

**Treble. Cast 1887. Warner. **

**2nd. Cast 1627. Pennington. **

**Recast 1664. Pennington. **

**Recast 1676. Purdue. **

**Recast 1934. Mears and Stainbank. **

**3rd. Cast 1627. Pennington**.

**Recast 1854. Pannell. **

**4th, Cast 1627. Pennington. **

**5th. Cast 1627. Pennington. **

**Recast 1751. Bilbie. **

**Recast 1934. Mears and Stainbank. **

**Tenor. Cast 1627. Pennington. **

**Recast 1787. Bilbie. **

**Recast 1887. Warner. **

### The Registers, etc. 

The Registers date from 1558 and are complete to the present day, except
for the period 1605-22, and for part of the Commonwealth Interregnum
when entries were few and irregular.

An interesting entry records that in 1678 one Ellen Hooper was buried
“but not in woollen because ye Act was unknown to us”. An Act had been
passed in 1666 with the object of encouraging the woollen trade, but it
was not rigorously enforced, and the entry must refer to the later one
of 1678 which laid down that “no corpse (except those who die of the
plague) shall be buried . . . in any stuff or thing other than what is
made of sheep’s wool only”. Affidavits showing that the law had been
obeyed had to be given to the Vicar within eight days of burial. Three
years after this entry the parish bought a copy of the Act.

Elsewhere in the Register, two notes have been added in a later hand,
both in Latin, of which the following are translations:

In 1643: In the following years until 1660 the Civil War raged; and,
after the 1648 entries: King Charles crowned with martyrdom, 30th
January, 1748 (i.e. 1749, new style).

Thomas Stambury, who was Parish Clerk from 1725-44, describing himself
as “ye Philomath”, added some notes on benefactors to the poor, and on
memorials to members of the Coplestone family.

Except for the Registers in daily use, all earlier Registers up to about
1970, can be found in the Devon Record Office, where most have been
converted to microfiche format and are available for inspection at any
time.

Also to be found at the Devon Record Office are an unusually complete
and detailed set of Churchwardens Accounts.

The Accounts for 1598-1737 were discovered in the Exeter Cathedral
Library about 60 years ago and were excellently transcribed by Mr. Percy
Morris, F.S.A. Those from 1737 onwards are mostly in original condition
but very interesting. Many details in the above account of the Church
have been obtained from these sources.

### The Communion Plate

The four-piece Communion set is the gift of John Sillifant, Esq., of
Coombe, who died in 1844.

It is said to be an almost exact copy of earlier plate, given in memory
of William Pidsley in 1752, which was sold and taken to Canada.

It consists of two Georgian style Chalices, parcel-gilt inside each bowl
numbered 126 & 127, each weighing 10oz 4dwt., (310g). One Paten, number
999, weighing 10oz, (310g). One tankard style flagon number 125,
weighing 30oz 12dwt.(950g). All items are engraved “Colebrook Devon. The
gift of John Sillifant of Coombe A.D. 1848 Christmas”, and the marks
EJWB (E.J.and W. Barnard) and the hallmarks for London 1848. There is
also a much earlier silver Collection Plate, hallmarked Exeter 1738/39
weighing 7oz, (220g). The history of this Plate is uncertain but it
could possibly have Pidsley connections.

The Church also possesses an interesting lithophane (or picture in
porcelain) of the Ascension, in which the effects of light and shade are
produced by the varying thickness of the material when it is held up to
the light or has a candle placed behind it. The process was invented in
1827 by one M. Burgoin, of Paris, who sold the methods and formula to
potters in England, Holland and Germany. The Colebrooke example seems to
have come from the last-named country, for the iron frame which holds it
has, on the shafts of its Gothic canopy and on the sides of its
hexagonal base, figures of angels and saints with the names of towns,
mostly German, below them. The picture measures 12 in. by 6 in. and
probably belongs to the period 1830-40. It was the gift of one George
Arscott, a memorial to whose brother, Frederick, dated 1925, can be seen
on the wall of the north aisle. These items are no longer on display for
security reasons.

### List Of Vicars

**c.1170 Paganus **

** William de Bisenam **

**1280 Alanus **

**1283 William de Churitone **

**Before 1330 Sir Adam **

**1334 Sir John de Nymet **

**c. 1400 Andrew Hude **

**1416 William Kelwa **

** John Tregodynow **

**1427 John Colmptone **

**1441 Richard Stoyle **

**1463 John Ewen **

**1475 John Rogers **

**1524 Roger Crugge **

**1533 John Williams **

**1546 John Moreman **

**1554 Richard Martyn (deprived) **

**1561 Henry Reddinge **

**1573 John Chardon **

**1578 Henry Eastebrooke, alias Shilston **

**1604 Christoper Eaton **

**c. 1644 Bartholomew Dickes } Intruded Ministers **

**1653 William Crompton } Intruded Ministers **

**1655 Richard Richards **

**1662 Richard Richards subscribed 11th August **

**1687 John Chilcot **

**1723 Philip Sprey **

**1724 Samuel Coker (deprived) **

**1740 Thomas Michell **

**1743 John Collins **

**1745 John Elworthy **

**1769 Peter Tucker, resigned c.1781 reinstated 1782 **

**1803 William Short **

**1805 Frederick Barnes, D.D. **

**1807 William Hutchinson **

**1816 Thomas Robyns **

**1831 Arthur Grueber **

**1848 Thomas Drosier **

**1885 Isidore Daimpre. **

**1923 Henry Cowper Pratt **

**1945 Glyndwr Rogers **

**1959 Arnold Pye **

**1965 Ronald Baker **

**1967 R.B.Smith **

**1969 Brian Copus **

**1974 Frank Chancellor **

**1975 D.A.Davies (vicar of Bow) Plurality with Bow **

**1978 Frank Atherton (Bow) **

**1980 Bernard Gales (Bow) **

**1994 John Hall (Bow). **

**2004 Rev. Canon Michael Hall **

### The Vicars

Little is known of the pre-Reformation vicars. Alanus and William de
Churitone, who were in office at the first two Visitations in 1281 and
1301 respectively, received very poor reports from the parishioners, but
Sir Adam in 1330 was highly praised.

Three of the later vicars figure in the Dictionary of National
Biography.

John Moreman, D.D., was Vicar from 1546 to 1554, though for most of
Edward VI’s reign he was in prison for alleged support of certain Romish
doctrines. In 1510 he had been elected fellow of Exeter College, Oxford,
an appointment which led Bishop Oldham to transfer many revenues from
that college to Corpus Christi, because his own nominee, a certain Mr.
Atkins, was defeated. In 1529 Moreman was appointed to the rich living
of Menheniot, in Cornwall, where, Prince says, he “undertook the
honourable fatigue of instructing youth in school-learning”. Hooker, the
Chronicler, who was one of his pupils there, says that he “was the first
to teach the people to say the Lord’s Prayer, the Beliefs and the
Commandments in the English tongue”. Given this, it is surprising to
find him associated with the West Country rebels who objected to the use
of English in the Church Services. One of their demands was that he and
Richard Crispyn, Rector of Woodleigh, should be freed from prison, but
they were not released until Queen Mary’s accession in 1553. Moreman
died the following year.

John Chardon, 1573-8, was another fellow of Exeter College, Oxford, and
D.D. He held the living of Heavitree besides that of Colebrooke. He was
a noted preacher of the reformed doctrine, but also defended the Church
against Puritan malcontents. He was consecrated Bishop of Down and
Connor in 1596 and died in 1601.

William Crompton, Minister, 1653-5, later held the living of Cullompton,
whence he was ejected at the Restoration for nonconformity, but he lived
on there and in Exeter until 1696, preaching in conventicles. He was the
author of several works on non-conformity.

Of the other Vicars, Henry Reddinge, 1561-73, had a daughter Frances who
married Roger Mills, later lord of the manor.

Christoper Eaton, 1604-c. 1644, was replaced during the Civil War by his
own son-in-law, but lived on in the parish, at his farm of Buttisfar, in
Coleford, till his death in 1655. He was Churchwarden in 1622.

Philip Sprey, who was instituted on 20th December 1723, seems never to
have officiated in the parish, and as early as the following March
Samuel Coker was instituted “because the living was vacant” (normally
the resignation or death of the predecessor is mentioned in the Bishops’
Registers).

William Short, 1803-5, was later Archdeacon of Cornwall, and his
successor Frederick Barnes, D.D., left to be Vicar of Colyton where he
stayed till the age of 83.

Isidore Daimpre, 1885-1923, wrote a small book about the Church and
Parish in 1903. During his time, but not under his guidance (for an
energetic curate, the Rev. B. Jones, was in charge during the Vicar’s
absence from the parish), the removal of the west gallery and the
restoration of the nave seating took place in 1895. Daimpre had the
distinction of being appointed sexton in 1912, by which time he had
succeeded in his pleas for a new vicarage to be built. During the months
of demolition and rebuilding, he lived at Penstone in the Railway
Cottage now known as Pencroft.

### The Vicarage

From details given in Walter de Bathe’s Chantry Charter, c. 1320, it
appears that the “tenement and piece of land” on which the Chantry
Chaplain was to “live suitably” were on the site of the present
Vicarage. The last recorded appointment to the chaplaincy occurred in
1412, and in 1536 John Williams was both Vicar and Chaplain. Thus at
some time between these two dates the two offices were combined, and the
incumbent probably then took over the Chaplain’s House as his Vicarage.
The Vicarage was sold in 1976 following Colebrooke becoming a plurality
with the Parishes of Bow and Zeal Monachorum, the vicar residing at Bow.
For many years it was known as Mincarlo House before reverting to the
more aptly named “Old Vicarage” of today.

This building, designed by Mr. E. H. Harbottle, of Exeter, dates from
1912. It is recorded that, when the old Vicarage was pulled down, it was
found that much of the work dated back to the fourteenth century, and
that the oak showed signs of having been previously used. Perhaps Walter
de Bathe had the building restored for his first chaplain. The roof was
found to be supported by oak beams reaching up from the foundations.
Hidden fireplaces, an old door and a four-light window still retaining
the \`pindles’ for shutters came to light. In a hole in one beam, there
was found a child’s glove or mitten, made of doe-skin. There are still
remains of two fireplaces and a chimney of the old building. Near the
drive gate, there is the base of an old cross, and some years ago there
was found in the garden a small section of the shaft suggesting by its
shape a date of the fifteenth century.\
\
By Neville P. Enderson © Neville P. Enderson
